AUSCULTATION 
CITATIONS – 
1.	Baid H. A critical review of auscultating bowel sounds. British Journal of Nursing. 2009 Oct 8;18(18):1125-9.
2.	Cannon WB. Auscultation of the rhythmic sounds produced by the stomach and intestines. American Journal of Physiology-Legacy Content. 1905 Oct 2;14(4):339-53.
3.	Sarkar M, Madabhavi I, Niranjan N, Dogra M. Auscultation of the respiratory system. Annals of thoracic medicine. 2015 Jul;10(3):158.
4.	Bohadana A, Izbicki G, Kraman SS. Fundamentals of lung auscultation. New England Journal of Medicine. 2014 Feb 20;370(8):744-51.
5.	Karnath B, Thornton W. Auscultation of the heart. Hospital Physician. 2002 Sep;38(9):39-45.
6.	Sanei S, Ghodsi M, Hassani H. An adaptive singular spectrum analysis approach to murmur detection from heart sounds. Medical engineering & physics. 2011 Apr 1;33(3):362-7.

Auscultation (based on the Latin verb auscultare "to listen") is listening to the internal sounds of the body, usually using a stethoscope. Auscultation is performed mainly for clinical examination of the Circulatory and Respiratory systems (heart and breath sounds), as well as the Gastrointestinal system (bowel sounds).
Auscultation is performed using a Stethoscope. The parts of the stethoscope include the Eartips, Y-shaped tubing, Chest-piece, Diaphragm and Bell.
When a physician places a stethoscope diaphragm on a patient's chest, sound waves traveling through the patient's body cause the flat surface of the diaphragm to vibrate. These sound waves originate from the vibration, which in turn cause fluctuations in air pressure as they propel forward, traveling in waves. These sound waves travel cause the flat surface of the diaphragm to vibrate. These vibration (sound waves) are then channeled in a particular direction in A Y-shaped rubber tube. Each wave reflects, or bounces, off the inside walls of the rubber tube, a phenomena called multiple reflection. Each successive wave reaches the eartips (rubber nubs) on the ends of the device, and finally the listener's eardrums

The Chestpiece of Stethescope is the part that contacts the patient, capturing sound. There are two sides of the chestpiece. On one facet is the diaphragm, a flat, metal disc that successively contains a flat, plastic disc. The diaphragm is the larger component of the chestpiece. On the opposite facet is the bell, a hollow, bell-shaped piece of metal with a small hole on top. The bell is primarily used to detect low-pitch sounds, like heart murmurs; the diaphragm is better at picking higher-pitch range, which include heartbeat and normal breath sounds 

The high-pitch sounds waves (like breath and heartbeats) travel at higher frequencies, causing greater number of pressure fluctuations in a given time period. Higher-pitch sounds will directly vibrate the surface area of the large, flat disc called Diaphragm. So, basically the sound waves produced by the opening and closing of an artery, for instance, are the same ones that travel through the stethoscope tubing to the listener's ears

The bell works somewhat differently .The bells usually detects the Lower-pitch sound waves. Rather than picking up the vibrations produced by the artery's movement directly, it picks up the vibrations caused in the skin due to artery’s movement. The smaller, hollow bell contacts the patient with less surface area -- just the thin, metal rim. Lower-pitch sounds, which may have a harder time vibrating the large diaphragm, still vibrate the skin as they move outward. The skin then vibrates the bell.
When a physician places a stethoscope diaphragm on a patient's chest, sound waves traveling through the patient's body cause the flat surface of the diaphragm to vibrate. These sound waves originate from the vibration, which in turn cause fluctuations in air pressure as they propel forward, traveling in waves. These sound waves travel cause the flat surface of the diaphragm to vibrate. These vibration (sound waves) are then channeled in a particular direction in A Y-shaped rubber tube. Each wave reflects, or bounces, off the inside walls of the rubber tube, a phenomena called multiple reflection. Each successive wave reaches the eartips (rubber nubs) on the ends of the device, and finally the listener's eardrums.
Auscultation is used for clinical analysis of Gastro-intestinal system, Respiratory system and cardiac system 
ABDOMINAL AUSCULTATION
Auscultation used for analysis of - 1.Peristalsis 2. Arterial Bruit 3.venous hum  
Peristalsis: Loud bowel sounds (hyperperistalsis) accompanied by abdominal distension and crampy abdominal pain suggests partial bowel obstruction. Absence of bowel sounds for at least 5 minutes strongly suggests bowel atony or ileus. 
Arterial Bruit: These are variable harsh sounds in tempo with the pulse due to turbulence in arterial flow. This may occur by unusually acute angulations at arterial branch points, arteriosclerotic plaques, compression of an artery or massive blood flow through very vascular tumors like hemangioma or hepatoma. Bruits over the liver suggests very vascular tumor like hepatoma or angioma. Similarly, over the spleen it suggests vascular tumor. A loud Bruit over the aorta suggests aortic aneurysm, atherosclerosis or extreme tortuosity of the aorta, Bruit over the kidneys in the flanks suggests renal artery stenosis
Venous Hum: Venous hum is continuous, softer and lower pitched than bruit. It signifies portal systemic shunting of venous flow when portal flow is obstructed. It is usually heard over the liver area and umbilicus.
RESPIRATORY AUSCULTATION 
Auscultation used for analysis of-
1.	Breath sounds- Vesicular and bronchial breath sounds
2. Foreign Sounds: Rales, Rhonchi, Stridor, Pleural friction rub,  
       3.  Vocal Resonance

BREATH SOUNDS 
1.	Vesicular sounds- This is characterized by active inspiration followed without a pause by passive expiration due to the elastic recoil of the alveoli which occurs maximally in the early phases of respiration giving an apparent impression of short expiration. The character of the sound is rustling due to the passage through the alveoli which selectively transmits lower frequency sounds and dampens the high frequency sounds. 

2.	Bronchial: It is heard in patients with bronchial asthma, chronic bronchitis and emphysema. This is characterized by active inspiration due to the passage of air into the bronchi. The alveolar phase is absent (because of consolidation in alveoli) and hence expiration is also active, occupying the same duration of time as inspiration. Since the alveolar phase is absent there is no rustling quality to the sound but a hollow bronchial character because now both lower and higher frequency sounds are conducted. It is heard in patients with cavity.  

FOREIGN SOUNDS 
1.	Rales: crackling sounds that originate in the smaller bronchi or alveoli, due to explosive opening of the airways in that part of the lung that is deflated to residual volume. Rales are present in pulmonary fibrosis, Left heart failure, Lung abscess, cavity and bronchiectasis

2.	Rhonchi/ Wheeze: continuous musical sound generated by air buzzing past the airway. The lung acts like the reed of a wind instrument, sounding when the passage of air vibrates the opposing airway walls which are just touching. Rhonchi is usually heard in Bronchial asthma, Bronchitis, Chronic obstructive lung disease, Localized obstruction (Malignancy), Cardiac failure

3.	Stridor: loud inspiratory sound heard over the airways due to obstruction to the respiratory tract. It is characterized by prolonged inspiration through an obstructed upper airway, which produces a characteristic sound. Stridor usually heard in Laryngeal or tracheal obstruction, Mediastinal growth.

4.	Pleural Friction Rub: In pleural inflammation the roughened surfaces of pleura rub against each other giving rise to a characteristic friction rub. Since the movement of the visceral over the parietal pleura is greatest at the lateral and posterior bases of the lung.

VOCAL RESOSNANCE 
 The laryngeal vibrations can be normally audible through the stethoscope as vocal resonance. High- pitched sounds, which are not easily palpable, can be picked up as vocal resonance. The vocal resonance of normal intensity conveys the impression of being produced near the stethoscope. It is examined by asking the patient to repeat the words "one, one, one" etc. and identical points on the chest wall should be alternately auscultated rapidly. Vocal resonance may be diminished or absent in pleural effusion, pneumothorax, thickened pleura and emphysema.

CARDIAC AUSCULTATION 
Auscultation used for the analysis of –
1. Heart sounds – S1, S2, S3, S4
2. Murmurs - Systolic, diastolic or continuous 
3. Other sounds- pericardial rub, opening snap, ejection clicks, etc.

HEART SOUNDS 

1.	FIRST HEART SOUND (S1)- It is produced by the closure of the mitral and tricuspid valves Normally the mitral valve closes before the tricuspid valve by 20-30 msec. Hence S1 is appreciated as a single sound which is a high frequency sound 

Abnormal First heart sound- 
a.	Loud First heart sound- seen in Mitral valve stenosis, Tricuspid valve stenosis, Arterio- Ventricular fistula.
b.	Soft First heart sound- seen in Pericardia effusion, Emphysema, Thick chest wall, Obesity

2.	SECOND HEART SOUND (S2)-  normally has two components, produced by closure of the aortic valve  and pulmonary valve. It is a high frequency sound, heard better in the aortic and pulmonary area.
Abnormal Second heart sound heard in Pulmonary stenosis , Tetrology of Fallot , Thick Chest Wall, COPD, Systemic Hypertension, Aortic aneurysm, Aortic stenosis , Aortic Regurgitation

3.	Third Heart Sound (S3 )- Normally only S1 and S2 heart sounds are audible. The third heart sound is heard in the following conditions:  Normal up to 30 years and in children, atheletes and pregnancy, Mitral Regurgitation, Congestive cardiac failure, Myocardial infarction, Atrail  Septal defect, Dilated cardiomyopathy

4.	FOURTH HEART SOUND (S4)- t is a low frequency sound. It occurs due to rapid emptying of atrium into a non-compliant ventricle in late rapid filling phase due to atrial contraction; heard best with the bell of a stethoscope. Normally it is inaudible. 
             It is heard in the following conditions: Elderly> 60 years, Myocardial infarction, Left 
             ventricular failure, Pulmonary or systemic hypertension, Mitral Regurgitation, Aortic    
             Regurgitation.

MURMURS 
 Murmurs are abnormal heart sounds caused by vibration of the valves or the wall of the heart or great vessels. Murmurs may be systolic (ifit is between first and second heart sound) or diastolic (if  between the second and first heart •sound) or continuous.
 Murmurs are heard in the following conditions- Valve calcification (mitral and aortic valve stenosis),  Endocarditis, Rheumatic fever, Congenital anomaly (Atrial/ Ventical septal defect).

